The sun begins to gild thewestern sky;
And now it is about thevery hour
That Silvia, at Friar Patrick'scell, should meet me.
She will not fail, forlovers break not hours,
Unless it be to comebefore their time;
So much they spur theirexpedition.
See where she comes.
Lady, a happy evening!
Amen, amen! Go on, goodEglamour,
Out at the postern by theabbey-wall:
I fear I am attended bysome spies.
Fear not: the forest isnot three leagues off;
If we recover that, we aresure enough.
Sir Proteus, what saysSilvia to my suit?
O, sir, I find her milderthan she was;
And yet she takesexceptions at your person.
What, that my leg is toolong?
No; that it is too little.
I'll wear a boot, to makeit somewhat rounder.
But love will not be spurr'dto what it loathes.
What says she to my face?
She says it is a fair one.
Nay then, the wanton lies;my face is black.
But pearls are fair; andthe old saying is,
Black men are pearls inbeauteous ladies' eyes.
'Tis true; such pearls asput out ladies' eyes;
For I had rather wink thanlook on them.
How likes she mydiscourse?
Ill, when you talk of war.
But well, when I discourseof love and peace?
But better, indeed, whenyou hold your peace.
What says she to myvalour?
O, sir, she makes no doubtof that.
She needs not, when sheknows it cowardice.
What says she to my birth?
That you are well derived.
True; from a gentleman toa fool.
Considers she mypossessions?
O, ay; and pities them.
Wherefore?
That such an ass shouldowe them.
That they are out bylease.
Here comes the duke.
How now, Sir Proteus! hownow, Thurio!
Which of you saw SirEglamour of late?
Not I.
Nor I.
Saw you my daughter?
Neither.
Why then,
She's fled unto thatpeasant Valentine;
And Eglamour is in hercompany.
'Tis true; for FriarLaurence met them both,
As he in penance wander'dthrough the forest;
Him he knew well, andguess'd that it was she,
But, being mask'd, he wasnot sure of it;
Besides, she did intendconfession
At Patrick's cell this even;and there she was not;
These likelihoods confirmher flight from hence.
Therefore, I pray you,stand not to discourse,
But mount you presentlyand meet with me
Upon the rising of themountain-foot
That leads towards Mantua,whither they are fled:
Dispatch, sweet gentlemen,and follow me.
Why, this it is to be apeevish girl,
That flies her fortunewhen it follows her.
I'll after, more to berevenged on Eglamour
Than for the love ofreckless Silvia.
And I will follow, morefor Silvia's love
Than hate of Eglamour thatgoes with her.
And I will follow, more tocross that love
Than hate for Silvia thatis gone for love.
(yells and laughing)
Come, come,
Be patient; we must bringyou to our captain.
A thousand more mischancesthan this one
Have learn'd me how tobrook this patiently.
Come, bring her away.
Where is the gentlemanthat was with her?
Being nimble-footed, hehath outrun us,
But Moyses and Valeriusfollow him.
Go thou with her to thewest end of the wood;
There is our captain: we'llfollow him that's fled;
The thicket is beset; hecannot 'scape.
Come, I must bring you toour captain's cave:
Fear not; he bears anhonourable mind,
And will not use a womanlawlessly.
O Valentine, this I endurefor thee!
How use doth breed a habitin a man!
This shadowy desert,unfrequented woods,
I better brook thanflourishing peopled towns:
Here can I sit alone,unseen of any,
And to the nightingale'scomplaining notes
Tune my distresses andrecord my woes.
O thou that dost inhabitin my breast,
Leave not the mansion solong tenantless,
Lest, growing ruinous, thebuilding fall
And leave no memory ofwhat it was!
Repair me with thypresence, Silvia;
Thou gentle nymph, cherishthy forlorn swain!
What halloing and whatstir is this to-day?
These are my mates, thatmake their wills their law,
Have some unhappypassenger in chase.
They love me well; yet Ihave much to do
To keep them from unciviloutrages.
Withdraw thee, Valentine:
who's this comes here?
Madam, this service I havedone for you,
Though you respect notaught your servant doth,
To hazard life and rescueyou from him
That would have forcedyour honour and your love;
Vouchsafe me, for my meed,but one fair look;
A smaller boon than this Icannot beg
And less than this, I amsure, you cannot give.
How like a dream is this Isee and hear!
Love, lend me patience toforbear awhile.
O miserable, unhappy thatI am!
Unhappy were you, madam,ere I came;
But by my coming I havemade you happy.
By thy approach thoumakest me most unhappy.
And me, when he approachethto your presence.
Had I been seized by ahungry lion,
I would have been abreakfast to the beast,
Rather than have falseProteus rescue me.
O, Heaven be judge how Ilove Valentine,
Whose life's as tender tome as my soul!
And full as much, for morethere cannot be,
I do detest false perjuredProteus.
Therefore be gone; solicitme no more.
What dangerous action,stood it next to death,
Would I not undergo forone calm look!
O, 'tis the curse in love,and still approved,
When women cannot lovewhere they're beloved!
When Proteus cannot lovewhere he's beloved.
Read over Julia's heart,thy first best love,
For whose dear sake thoudidst then rend thy faith
Into a thousand oaths; andall those oaths
Descended into perjury, tolove me.
Thou hast no faith leftnow, unless thou'dst two;
And that's far worse thannone; better have none
Than plural faith which istoo much by one:
Thou counterfeit to thytrue friend!
In love Who respects friend?
All men but Proteus.
Nay, if the gentle spiritof moving words
Can no way change you to amilder form,
I'll woo you like asoldier, at arms' end,
And love you 'gainst thenature of love,--force ye.
O heaven!
I'll force thee yield tomy desire.
Ruffian, let go that rudeuncivil touch,
Thou friend of an illfashion!
Valentine!
Thou common friend, that'swithout faith or love,
For such is a friend now;treacherous man!
Thou hast beguiled myhopes; nought but mine eye
Could have persuaded me:now I dare not say
I have one friend alive;thou wouldst disprove me.
Who should be trusted,when one's own right hand
Is perjured to the bosom?Proteus,
I am sorry I must nevertrust thee more,
But count the world astranger for thy sake.
The private wound is deepest:O time most accurst,
'Mongst all foes that afriend should be the worst!
My shame and guiltconfounds me.
Forgive me, Valentine: ifhearty sorrow
Be a sufficient ransom foroffence,
I tender 't here; I do astruly suffer
As e'er I did commit.
Then I am paid;
And once again I doreceive thee honest.
Who by repentance is notsatisfied
Is nor of heaven nor earth,for these are pleased.
By penitence the Eternal'swrath's appeased:
And, that my love mayappear plain and free,
All that was mine inSilvia I give thee.
O me unhappy!
Look to the boy.
Why, boy! why, wag! hownow! what's the matter?
Look up; speak.
O good sir,
my master charged me to delivera ring to Madam Silvia,
which, out of my neglect,was never done.
Where is that ring, boy?
Here 'tis; this is it.
How! let me see:
Why, this is the ring Igave to Julia.
O, cry you mercy, sir, Ihave mistook:
This is the ring you sentto Silvia.
But how camest thouby this ring?
At my depart I gavethis unto Julia.
And Julia herself did giveit me;
And Julia herself hathbrought it hither.
How! Julia!
Behold her that gave aimto all thy oaths,
And entertain'd 'em deeplyin her heart.
How oft hast thou withperjury cleft the root!
O Proteus, let this habitmake thee blush!
Be thou ashamed that Ihave took upon me
Such an immodest raiment,if shame live
In a disguise of love:
It is the lesser blot,modesty finds,
Women to change their shapesthan men their minds.
Than men their minds! O 'tistrue.
Were man constant,he were perfect.
That one error Fillshim with faults;
makes him run throughall the sins:
Inconstancy falls off ereit begins.
What is in Silvia's face,but I may spy
More fresh in Julia's witha constant eye?
Come, come, a hand fromeither:
Let me be blest to makethis happy close;
'Twere pity two such friendsshould be long foes.
Bear witness, Heaven, Ihave my wish for ever.
And I mine.
A prize, a prize, a prize!
Forbear, forbear, I say!it is my lord the duke.
Your grace is welcome to aman disgraced,
Banished Valentine.
Sir Valentine!
Yonder is Silvia; andSilvia's mine.
Thurio, give back, or elseembrace thy death;
Come not within themeasure of my wrath;
Do not name Silvia thine;if once again,
Verona shall not holdthee. Here she stands;
Take but possession of herwith a touch:
I dare thee but to breatheupon my love.
Sir Valentine, I care notfor her, I;
I hold him but a fool thatwill endanger
His body for a girl thatloves him not:
I claim her not, andtherefore she is thine.
The more degenerate andbase art thou,
To make such means for heras thou hast done
And leave her on suchslight conditions.
Now, by the honour of myancestry,
I do applaud thy spirit,Valentine,
And think thee worthy ofan empress' love:
Know then, I here forgetall former griefs,
Cancel all grudge, repealthee home again,
Plead a new state in thyunrivall'd merit,
To which I thus subscribe:Sir Valentine,
Thou art a gentleman andwell derived;
Take thou thy Silvia, forthou hast deserved her.
I thank your grace; thegift hath made me happy.
I now beseech you, foryour daughter's sake,
To grant one boom that Ishall ask of you.
I grant it, for thine own,whate'er it be.
These banish'd men that Ihave kept withal
Are men endued with worthyqualities:
Forgive them what theyhave committed here
And let them be recall'dfrom their exile:
They are reformed, civil,full of good
And fit for greatemployment, worthy lord.
Thou hast prevail'd; Ipardon them and thee:
Dispose of them as thouknow'st their deserts.
Come, let us go: we willinclude all jars
With triumphs, mirth andrare solemnity.
(cheers and music)
And, as we walk along, Idare be bold
With our discourse to makeyour grace to smile.
What think you of thispage, my lord?
I think the boy hath gracein him; he blushes.
I warrant you, my lord,more grace than boy.
What mean you by thatsaying?
Please you, I'll tell youas we pass along,
That you will wonder whathath fortuned.
Come, Proteus; 'tis yourpenance but to hear
The story of your lovesdiscovered:
That done, our day ofmarriage shall be yours;
One feast, one house, onemutual happiness.